HMS-8965: add overview document that explains context (#1167)
content-services/content-sources-backend: docs/overview.md

If you want to test that a template is assigned to a system, [see this document](./register_client.md).

[Read more about templates](./workflows/templates.md)  
 [Or see this article introducing templates](https://developers.redhat.com/articles/2025/04/23/how-use-content-templates-red-hat-insights)

### Use-Cases

    1. I want to build a new image with precisely defined versions of repos, which I can then install on all my servers. I want the repo versions to be frozen, so users on those systems cannot update to newer versions.
    - create a new template, then build a new blueprint, then build a new image

    2. I have a test server where I want to use only specific versions of repos.
    - attach to a template from an already running system

    3. I want to use a newer version of a repository on my servers.
    - update template and refresh the systems

### Related Services

There is a related service called Patch that shares some things with the Content Sources App.  
You can find its code following these links:

- [patchman-ui](https://github.com/RedHatInsights/patchman-ui)
- [patchman-engine](https://github.com/RedHatInsights/patchman-engine)

> ### Note on Terminology - Service, Application, Platform

Reviewer: I think if it helps you it will help others when they join the team in the future, so +1!   There can be a lot of terms to learn in the future

## A Broad Context for the Content Application

> The focus of this document is to explain in plain, down-to-earth language a context and purpose of the Content application. It gives answers to questions like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The focus of this document is to explain in plain, down-to-earth language the context and purpose of the Content Sources application. It gives answers to questions like:
```

> - What is the Content application?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- What is the Content Sources application?
```

- Where does it fit into other Red Hat Products?
- What capabilities does the app provide to users?
- What use-cases does it deal with?

> This document should help any newcomers to give a basic intro so they can have easier time to jump into other documents in this folder and dive into the code. The appropriate documents that go more into details are linked throughout this document.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This document should give any newcomers a basic intro so they can have an easier time to jump into other documents in this folder and dive into the code. The appropriate documents that go more into details are linked throughout this document.
```

> ### Where can I find the code for the Content app?

Reviewer 3: I think the two "names" (`Content App` and `Content Sources App`) are a little confusing, I would call it the **content sources app** everywhere and not just content ✍🏼 we are in the content tab/section but that's not exactly an app 😅 

and with that I would also not include the mention of patch repos as part of the content **sources** app 💭 
_as Justin said: that's a separate app not described here, it just has some integrations with content **sources**_

Reviewer 3: plus I think calling it a service instead of an app might also be more clear and exact, but that's a bit of a nitpick 😅

Author: Ok, what's your definition of an app versus a service? As I see it, service is a smaller part providing features in an otherwise bigger whole, which is an application. 
It might be more appropriate, since Content Sources (service) is under Insights (app) :thinking:

The Content application is hosted in 4 repositories:

- [content-sources-frontend](https://github.com/content-services/content-sources-frontend)
- [content-sources-backend](https://github.com/content-services/content-sources-backend)
- [patchman-ui](https://github.com/RedHatInsights/patchman-ui)

> - [patchman-engine](https://github.com/RedHatInsights/patchman-engine)

Reviewer: Patch is somewhat of a separate application with some integration with content-sources.  It might make sense to list these towards the bottom  under "related applications" and we can do something similar there at some point (not needed now).

We may try to merge these frontends especially in the future and it might make sense at that point to talk about them as one larger 'application', but we can tackle that when the time comes :)

Reviewer 3: yeah, I wouldn't put patch so prominently here since the doc otherwise doesn't really describe/explain that part 👍🏼

Author: Agreed, I put it under "Related Applications" at the end.

Currently (2025) all the repositories are mantained by one team.

### Where does the Content app fit in? Insights and Console Dot apps

> The Content app is just a small part of a bigger application called Insights. And Insights application itself is a part of an even bigger application called Console Dot (or officially Hybrid Cloud Console).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Content app is just a small part of a bigger application called Insights. The Insights application itself is a part of an even bigger application called Console Dot (or officially Hybrid Cloud Console).
```

> All Red Hat users who purchase RHEL operating system get access to the Insights app. A usual Red Hat's RHEL user has the role of a system administrator. Insights app gives system administrators additional maintanance capabilities through GUI for managing their operating systems: they can configure all their systems, build installation images, view vulnerability reports, keep systems up-to-date, apply advisory recommendations and more.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All Red Hat users who purchase a RHEL operating system subscription get access to the Insights app. A usual Red Hat's RHEL user has the role of a system administrator. Insights app gives system administrators additional maintenance capabilities through a GUI for managing their operating systems: they can configure all their systems, build installation images, view vulnerability reports, keep systems up-to-date, apply advisory recommendations and more.
```

> ### What is the raison d'être of the Content app?

Reviewer 4: Oh its french word for "to be"

> ### What is the raison d'être of the Content app?

Author: No, its french :D 
I wanted to elevate the language of our docs :D

> ### What is the raison d'être of the Content app?

Reviewer 3: _if I can have my 2 cents:_ I had to look up what the hell that is 😵‍💫 if this phrase is "common" knowledge then maybe I am just dumb, lol 😂 
but I would rather not elevate the language and keep it more accessible since not everyone speaks french 🤷🏼

> ### What is the raison d'être of the Content app?

Author: Who would have thought that these 3 little words would spark such emotions :laughing: 

So does "_Why does the Content Sources app exist?"_ sound better to you?

You know, "raison d'être" _is considered_ somewhat of a common knowledge, at least in my book. :smiley:  Also the phrase fits [the meaning that I want to express](https://idioms.thefreedictionary.com/raison+d%27%c3%aatre). :smile:

> System administrators need a reliable source of repositories/packages which can be safely installed on a system without compromising that system's integrity. Repositories and packages are updated daily and it makes it hard for system administators to install a particular historic version of a repository.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
System administrators need a reliable source of repositories and packages which can be safely installed on a system without compromising that system's integrity. Repositories and packages are updated daily and it makes it hard for system administrators to install a particular historic version of a repository.
```

> Content application provides such a functionality. It provides snapshots of a targeted repository in time, allowing system administrators to choose a historical version of a repo frozen in time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Content Sources application provides such a functionality. It provides snapshots of a targeted repository in time, allowing system administrators to choose a historical version of a repo frozen in time.
```

> Most of the time, system administrators use the Content app as part of the bigger image building workflow - when they need to create an image with particular version of repositories in it. Those images they then use to spin up servers in bulk.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Most of the time, system administrators use the Content app as part of the bigger image building workflow when they need to create an image with particular version of repositories in it. Those images they then use to provison servers in bulk.
```

The future goal is to allow users to define only templates as a use-case, removing the Content app action of adding a repository from the navigation bar. Adding a repository action will then be a part of a template definition. More on Content app actions follows below.

### What can users do with the Content app?

> The Content app allows users to choose and define which versions of [packages](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Package_format) contained in a **repository** (collection of packages) they want to keep track of. So Content app is a bit like the GIT version control system, only for .rpm packages and repositories. Plus there runs a regular service that checks for updates of repositories and saves any new versions into a database. A repository can be coming from Red Hat or from a third-party (a custom repository).

Author: Very well put. I updated the text :)

> The Content app allows users to choose and define which versions of [packages](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Package_format) contained in a **repository** (collection of packages) they want to keep track of. So Content app is a bit like the GIT version control system, only for .rpm packages and repositories. Plus there runs a regular service that checks for updates of repositories and saves any new versions into a database. A repository can be coming from Red Hat or from a third-party (a custom repository).

Author: I reworded it slightly, what do you think?

> The Content Sources app enables users to choose and define which versions of packages contained in a repository (collection of packages) they want to keep track of. A repository can come from Red Hat or from a third-party (a custom repository). **The app is effectively a version control system specifically for .rpm packages and repositories. There is a regular service that checks for updates of repositories, takes their snapshots and saves those snapshots as a new version into a database. So in the end there are stacks of those snapshots for each repository, which serve as a version history for a particular repository. This provides users with the ability to use older versions of repositories.**

> Users can also define which repositories they want to use in a **template**. Template works like a blueprint that puts 2 and more repositories together.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Users can also define which repositories they want to use in a **template**. Template works like a blueprint that puts 2 or more repositories together.
```

So there are 3 layers - packages(1.), which are contained in repositories(2.), which can be mixed into templates(3.).

Content app currently works only with the YUM repository format type.

The versioning capability of the Content app is backed by the Pulp Server Service, which is maintained by the Pulp team.

[Learn more about the architecture and dependencies](./architecture.md)

### Content app Capabilities / Actions

1. Adding a Repository

   There are 3 ways to add a repository:

   A: introspect only  
   First you need to provide a URL containing a repository. This option only introspects the provided URL and creates metadata about the repo, which are then saved into a DB. Plus there is a service that continuously checks for updates of the tracked repositories.

   [Read more about introspection](./workflows/introspection.md)

   B: snapshot  

>    This is the default option. It introspects the provided url and creates metadata, plus it copies the whole repository into a DB. There is also a service that continuously keeps checking the repo for any changes and creates history of snapshotted versions for the repo. These snapshots can then be used to build an image.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   This is the default option. It introspects the repository at the provided URL and creates metadata, plus it copies the whole repository into a DB. There is also a service that continuously keeps checking the repo for any changes and creates history of snapshotted versions for the repo. These snapshots can then be used to build an image.
```

>    This is the default option. It introspects the provided url and creates metadata, plus it copies the whole repository into a DB. There is also a service that continuously keeps checking the repo for any changes and creates history of snapshotted versions for the repo. These snapshots can then be used to build an image.

Author: By directly you mean that they can be used through dnf or manually installed?

>    This is the default option. It introspects the provided url and creates metadata, plus it copies the whole repository into a DB. There is also a service that continuously keeps checking the repo for any changes and creates history of snapshotted versions for the repo. These snapshots can then be used to build an image.

Reviewer 5: Good question. So you can download the repository config file for a single snapshot and add that to your system. Then you would be able to dnf install the packages in that snapshot

>    This is the default option. It introspects the provided url and creates metadata, plus it copies the whole repository into a DB. There is also a service that continuously keeps checking the repo for any changes and creates history of snapshotted versions for the repo. These snapshots can then be used to build an image.

Author: Thank for clarifying!

   Snapshot making depends on the [tasking system](./tasking_system/tasking_system.md).

   [Read more about snapshotting](./workflows/snapshotting.md)

   C: upload  

>    This option behaves like the snapshot one but working on private/secret repositories. So instead of providing a public URL, users upload a repository, which is then saved as a snaphot into a DB.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   This option behaves like the snapshot one but for local private repositories. So instead of providing a public URL, users upload a repository, which is then saved as a snaphot into a DB.
```

>    This option behaves like the snapshot one but working on private/secret repositories. So instead of providing a public URL, users upload a repository, which is then saved as a snaphot into a DB.

Author: This explanation sounds much better! Updated

2. Creating a Template

>    A template is a blueprint that combines two or more snapshots of a repository into one group. Users can add Red Hat and custom repositories to a template and then have an image built out of that template.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   A template is a blueprint that combines two or more snapshots of a repository into one group. Users can add Red Hat and custom repositories to a template, optionally select a snapshot, and then have an image built from that template.
```

>    A template is a blueprint that combines two or more snapshots of a repository into one group. Users can add Red Hat and custom repositories to a template and then have an image built out of that template.

Reviewer 5: that sounds good to me

   [Read more about templates](./workflows/templates.md)  

>    [Or check out this article](https://developers.redhat.com/articles/2025/04/23/how-use-content-templates-red-hat-insights)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   [Or see this article](https://developers.redhat.com/articles/2025/04/23/how-use-content-templates-red-hat-insights)
```
